\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c @tex
@c \globaldefs=1
@c \def\baselinefactor{1.5}
@c \setleading{\textleading}
@c @end tex 

@setfilename libcdio.info
@settitle CD TEXT Description

@copying
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, modify, and distribute it, as long as the
references to the original information sources are maintained.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011-2012 Thomas Schmitt @email{scdbackup@@gmx.net}.
@end quotation
@end copying

@paragraphindent 0
@exampleindent 0

@titlepage
@title CD Text Description
@author Thomas Schmitt for libburnia-project.org 
@vskip 2in plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top CD-Text Description

@insertcopying

@menu
* CD-TEXT from the User Viewpoint::
* Content Specification::
* CD-TEXT Packet Format::
* Sony Text File Format (Input Sheet Version 0.7T)::
* CDRWIN Cue Sheet with CD Text::
* References::
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node CD-TEXT from the User Viewpoint
@chapter CD-TEXT from the User Viewpoint

CD-TEXT records attributes of disc and tracks on audio CD.

The attributes are grouped into blocks which represent particular languages.
Up to 8 blocks are possible.

There are 13 defined attribute categories, which are called Pack Types and are
identified by a single-byte code:
@table @kbd
@item 0x80 
Title
@item 0x81
Performers
@item 0x82
Songwriters
@item 0x83
Composers
@item 0x84
Arrangers 
@item 0x85
Message Area
@item 0x86
Disc Identification (text-and-binary)
@item 0x87
Genre Identification (text-and-binary)
@item 0x88
Table of Contents (binary)
@item 0x89
Second Table of Content information (binary; 0x8a to 0x8c are reserved.)
@item 0x8d
Closed Information
@item 0x8e
UPC/EAN code of the album and ISRC code of each track
@item 0x8f
binary: Size Information of the Block
@end table

Categories @kbd{0x86}, @kbd{0x87}, @kbd{0x88}, @kbd{0x89}, @kbd{0x8d}
apply to the whole disc.

Categories @kbd{0x80}, @kbd{0x81}, @kbd{0x82}, @kbd{0x83}, @kbd{0x84},
@kbd{0x85}, and @kbd{0x8e} have to also be attributed to each
track if they are present for the whole disc.

Category @kbd{0x8f} describes the overall content of a block and in part of all
other blocks.

The total size of a block's attribute set is restricted by the fact that
it has to be stored in at most 253 records with 12 bytes of
payload. These records are called Text Packs.  A shortcut for repeated
identical track texts is provided, so that a text that is identical to
the one of the previous track occupies only 2 or 4 bytes.

@node Content Specification
@chapter Content Specificiation

Pack types @kbd{0x80} to @kbd{0x85} and @kbd{0x8e} contain 0-terminated
cleartext. If double-byte characters are used, then two 0-bytes
terminate the cleartext.  The meaning of @kbd{0x80} to @kbd{0x85} should
be clear by above list. They are encoded according to the Character Code
of their block. Either as ISO-8859-1 single byte characters, or as 7-bit
ASCII single byte characters, or as MS-JIS double byte characters.  More
info on @kbd{0x8e} is given below.

Pack type @kbd{0x86} (Disc Identification) Sony documents as
``Catalog Number: (use ASCII Code) Catalog Number of the album''. So it is
not really binary but might be non-printable, and should contain only
bytes with bit 7 set to zero.

Pack type 0x87 contains 2 binary bytes, followed by 0-terminated cleartext.
The two binary bytes form a Big-endian index to the following list.

@table @kbd
@item 0x0000
Not Used --- Sony prescribes this if no genre applies.
@item 0x0001
Not Defined
@item 0x0002
Adult Contemporary
@item 0x0003
Alternative Rock
@item 0x0004
Childrens Music
@item 0x0005
Classical
@item 0x0006
Contemporary Christian
@item 0x0007
Country
@item 0x0008
Dance
@item 0x0009
Easy Listening
@item 0x000a
Erotic
@item 0x000b
Folk
@item 0x000c
Gospel
@item 0x000d
Hip Hop
@item 0x000e
Jazz
@item 0x000f
Latin
@item 0x0010
Musical
@item 0x0011
New Age
@item 0x0012
Opera
@item 0x0013
Operetta
@item 0x0014
Pop Music
@item 0x0015
Rap
@item 0x0016
Reggae
@item 0x0017
Rock Music
@item 0x0018
Rhythm & Blues
@item 0x0019
Sound Effects
@item 0x001a
Spoken Word
@item 0x001b
World Music
@end table

Sony documents the cleartext part as "Genre information that would supplement
the Genre Code, such as ``USA Rock music in the 60s\'''. Always ASCII encoded.

Pack type @kbd{0x88} records information from the CD's Table of Content, as of
READ PMA/TOC/ATIP Format 0010b (mmc5r03c.pdf, table 490 TOC Track Descriptor
Format, Q Sub-channel).
See below, Format of CD-TEXT packs, for more details about the content of
pack type @kbd{0x88}.

Pack type @kbd{0x89} is yet quite unclear. It might be a representation
of Playback Skip Interval, Mode-5 Q sub-channel, POINT 01 to 40
(mmc5r03.pdf 4.2.3.7.4).  If so, then this seems not to apply to write
type SAO, because the CUE SHEET format offers no way to express Mode-5
Q.  See below, Format of CD-TEXT packs, for an example of this pack
type.

Pack type @kbd{0x8d} Sony documentes as ``Closed Information: (use
8859-1 Code) Any information can be recorded on disc as
memorandum. Information in this field will not be read by CD TEXT
players available to the public.''  It is always ISO-8859-1 encoded.

Pack type 0x8e is documented by Sony as ``UPC/EAN Code (POS Code) of the
album.  This field typically consists of 13 characters.'' This is always
ASCII encoded.  It applies to tracks as ``ISRC code [which] typically
consists of 12 characters'' and is always ISO-8859-1 encoded.  MMC calls
these information entities Media Catalog Number and ISRC.  The catalog
number consists of 13 decimal digits.  ISRC consists of 12 characters: 2
country code [0-9A-Z], 3 owner code [0-9A-Z], 2 year digits (00 to 99),
5 serial number digits (00000 to 99999).

Pack type @kbd{0x8f} summarizes the whole list of text packs of a block.
See the next section for details.

@node CD-TEXT Packet Format
@chapter CD-TEXT Packet Format

The attributes are represented on CD as Text Packs in the sub-channel of
the Lead-in of the disc. The file @file{doc/cookbook.txt} of the
libburnia distribution ddescribe write the readily formatted CD-TEXT
pack array to CD, and how to read CD-TEXT packs from CD.

The format is explained in part in MMC-3 @xref{mmc3r10g.pdf,,
mmc3r10g.pdf Annex J}, and in part by the documentation in Sony's
@xref{cdtext.zip,,cdtext.zip}.

Each pack consists of a 4-byte header, 12 bytes of payload, and 2 bytes
of CRC.

The first byte of each pack tells the pack type. See above for a list of
types.

The second byte tells the track number to which the first text piece in
a pack is associated. Number 0 means the whole album. Higher numbers are
valid for types 0x80 to 0x85, and 0x8e. With these types, there should
be one text for the disc and one for each track.  With types 0x88 and
0x89, the second byte bears a track number, too.  With type 0x8f, the
second byte counts the record parts from 0 to 2.

The third byte is a sequential counter.

The fourth byte is the Block Number and Character Position Indicator.
It consists of three bit fields:

@table @dfn
@item bits 0-3
Character position. Either the number of characters which the current
text inherited from the previous pack, or 15 if the current
text started before the previous pack.
@item bits 4-6
Block Number (groups text packs in language blocks)
@item bit 7
Is Double Byte Character? Is 0 if single byte characters, 1 if double-byte
characters.
@end table

The 12 payload bytes contain pieces of NULL- or @code{\0}-terminated texts or
binary data.  A text may span over several packs. Unused characters in a
pack are used for the next text of the same pack type. If no text of the
same type follows, then the remaining text bytes are set to 0.

The CRC algorithm uses divisor @kbd{0x11021}. The resulting 16-bit
residue of the polynomial division is zero extended in the upper bits
(xor-ed with @kbd{0xffff}) and written as Big-endian number in bytes 16
and 17 of the pack.

The text packs are grouped in up to 8 blocks of at most 256 packs. Each
block is in charge for one language. Sequence numbers of each block are
counted separately. All packs of block 0 come before the packs of block
1.

The limitation of block number and sequence numbers imply that there are
at most 2048 text packs possible. (READ TOC/PMS/ATIP could retrieve 3640
packs, as it is limited to 64 KB - 2.)

If a text of a track (pack types @kbd{0x80} to @kbd{0x85} and
@kbd{0x8e}) repeats identically for the next track, then it may be
represented by a TAB character (ASCII 9) for single byte texts,
resp. two TAB characters for double byte texts.  (This should be used
because 256 * 12 bytes is few space for 99 tracks.)

The two binary bytes of pack type @kbd{0x87} are written to the first
@kbd{0x87} pack of a block. They may or may not be repeated at the start
of the follow-up packs of type @kbd{0x87}.

The first pack of type @kbd{0x88} in a block records in its payload bytes
as follows:
@table @var
@item 0 
PMIN of POINT A1 = First Track Number
@item 1
PMIN of POINT A2 = Last Track Number
@item 2
unknown, 0 in Sony example
@item 3
PMIN of POINT A2 = Start position of Lead-Out
@item 4
PSEC of POINT A2 = Start position of Lead-Out
@item 5
PFRAME of POINT A2 = Start position of Lead-Out
@item 6 to 11
unknown, 0 in Sony example
@end table

The following packs record @kbd{PMIN}, @kbd{PSEC}, @kbd{PFRAME} of the
POINTs between the lowest track number (1 or @code{01h}) and the highest
track number (99 or @code{63h}).  The payload of the last pack is padded
by 0s.

The Sony .TOC example:
@smallexample
  A0 01
  A1 14
  A2 63:02:18
  01 00:02:00
  02 04:11:25
  03 08:02:50
  04 11:47:62
  ...
  13 53:24:25
  14 57:03:25
@end smallexample
yields:
@smallexample
  88 00 23 00 01 0e 00 3f 02 12 00 00 00 00 00 00 12 00
  88 01 24 00 00 02 00 04 0b 19 08 02 32 0b 2f 3e 67 2d
  ...
  88 0d 27 00 35 18 19 39 03 19 00 00 00 00 00 00 ea af
@end smallexample

Pack type @kbd{0x89} is yet quite unclear. Especially what the
information shall mean to the user of the CD. The time points in the
Sony example are in the time range of the tracks numbers that are given
before the time points:

@smallexample
  01 02:41:48 01 02:52:58
  06 23:14:25 06 23:29:60
  07 28:30:39 07 28:42:30
  13 55:13:26 13 55:31:50
@end smallexample
nyields:
@smallexample
  89 01 28 00 01 04 00 00 00 00 02 29 30 02 34 3a f3 0c
  89 06 29 00 02 04 00 00 00 00 17 0e 19 17 1d 3c 73 92
  89 07 2a 00 03 04 00 00 00 00 1c 1e 27 1c 2a 1e 72 20
  89 0d 2b 00 04 04 00 00 00 00 37 0d 1a 37 1f 32 0b 62
@end smallexample

The track numbers are stored in the track number byte of the packs. The
two time points are stored in byte 6 to 11 of the payload. Byte 0 of the
payload seems to be a sequential counter. Byte 1 always 4? Byte 2 to 5
always 0?

Pack type @kbd{0x8f} summarizes the whole list of text packs of a block.
So there is one group of three 0x8f packs per block.
Nevertheless each 0x8f group tells the highest sequence number and the
language code of all blocks.

The payload bytes of three @kbd{0x8f} packs form a 36-byte record. 
The track number bytes of the three packs have the values 0, 1, 2.

@smallexample
    Byte :
       0 : Character code for pack types 0x80 to 0x85:
           0x00 = ISO-8859-1
           0x01 = 7 bit ASCII
           0x80 = MS-JIS (japanese Kanji, double byte characters)
       1 : Number of first track
       2 : Number of last track
       3 : libcdio source states: "cd-text information copyright byte"
           Probably 3 means "copyrighted", 0 means "not copyrighted".
  4 - 19 : Pack count of the various types 0x80 to 0x8f.
           Byte number N tells the count of packs of type 0x80 + (N - 4).
           I.e. the first byte in this field of 16 counts packs of type 0x80.
 20 - 27 : Highest sequence byte number of blocks 0 to 7.
 28 - 36 : Language code for blocks 0 to 7 (tech3264.pdf appendix 3)
@end smallexample

@table @kbd
@item 0x00
Unknown
@item 0x01
Albanian
@item 0x02
Breton
@item 0x03
Catalan
@item 0x04
Croatian
@item 0x05
Welsh
@item 0x06
Czech
@item 0x07
Danish
@item 0x08
German
@item 0x09
English
@item 0x0a
Spanish
@item 0x0b
Esperanto
@item 0x0c
Estonian
@item 0x0d
Basque
@item 0x0e
Faroese
@item 0x0f
French 
@item 0x10
Frisian
@item 0x11
Irish
@item 0x12
Gaelic
@item 0x13
Galician
@item 0x14
Icelandic
@item 0x15
Italian
@item 0x16
Lappish
@item 0x17
Latin
@item 0x18
Latvian
@item 0x19
Luxembourgian
@item 0x1a
Lithuanian
@item 0x1b
Hungarian
@item 0x1c
Maltese        
@item 0x1d
Dutch
@item 0x1e
Norwegian
@item 0x1f
Occitan
@item 0x20
Polish
@item 0x21
Portuguese
@item 0x22
Romanian
@item 0x23
Romansh
@item 0x24
Serbian
@item 0x25
Slovak
@item 0x26
Slovenian
@item 0x27
Finnish
@item 0x28
Swedish
@item 0x29
Turkish
@item 0x2a
Flemish
@item 0x2b
Wallon
@item 0x45
Zulu
@item 0x46
Vietnamese
@item 0x47
Uzbek
@item 0x48
Urdu
@item 0x49
Ukrainian
@item 0x4a
Thai
@item 0x4b
Telugu
@item 0x4c
Tatar
@item 0x4d
Tamil
@item 0x4e
Tadzhik
@item 0x4f
Swahili
@item 0x50
Sranan Tongo
@item 0x51
Somali
@item 0x52
Sinhalese
@item 0x53
Shona
@item 0x54
Serbo-croat
@item 0x55
Ruthenian
@item 0x56
Russian
@item 0x57
Quechua
@item 0x58
Pushtu
@item 0x59
Punjabi
@item 0x5a
Persian
@item 0x5b
Papamiento
@item 0x5c
Oriya
@item 0x5d
Nepali
@item 0x5e
Ndebele
@item 0x5f
Marathi
@item 0x60
Moldavian
@item 0x61
Malaysian
@item 0x62
Malagasay
@item 0x63
Macedonian
@item 0x64
Laotian
@item 0x65
Korean
@item 0x66
Khmer
@item 0x67
Kazakh
@item 0x68
Kannada
@item 0x69
Japanese
@item 0x6a
Indonesian
@item 0x6b
Hindi
@item 0x6c
Hebrew
@item 0x6d
Hausa
@item 0x6e
Gurani
@item 0x6f
Gujurati
@item 0x70
Greek
@item 0x71
Georgian
@item 0x72
Fulani
@item 0x73
Dari
@item 0x74
Churash
@item 0x75
Chinese
@item 0x76
Burmese
@item 0x77
Bulgarian
@item 0x78
Bengali
@item 0x79
Bielorussian
@item 0x7a
Bambora
@item 0x7b
Azerbaijani
@item 0x7c
Assamese
@item 0x7d
Armenian
@item 0x7e
Arabic
@item 0x7f
Amharic
@end table
Note: Not all of thes above codes have ever been seen with CD-TEXT.

For example these three packs
@smallexample
  42 : 8f 00 2a 00 01 01 03 00 06 05 04 05 07 06 01 02 48 65
  43 : 8f 01 2b 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 06 03 2c 00 00 00 c0 20
  44 : 8f 02 2c 00 00 00 00 00 09 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 11 45
@end smallexample

decode to:

@smallexample
Byte :Value Meaning
   0 : 01 = ASCII 7-bit
   1 : 01 = first track is 1
   2 : 03 = last track is 3
   3 : 00 = copyright (0 = public domain, 3 = copyrighted ?)
   4 : 06 = 6 packs of type 0x80
   5 : 05 = 5 packs of type 0x81
   6 : 04 = 4 packs of type 0x82
   7 : 05 = 5 packs of type 0x83
   8 : 07 = 7 packs of type 0x84
   9 : 06 = 6 packs of type 0x85
  10 : 01 = 1 pack  of type 0x86
  11 : 02 = 2 packs of type 0x87
  12 : 00 = 0 packs of type 0x88
  13 : 00 = 0 packs of type 0x89
  14 : 00 00 00 00 = 0 packs of types 0x8a to 0x8d
  18 : 06 = 6 packs of type 0x8e
  19 : 03 = 3 packs of type 0x8f
  20 : 2c = last sequence for block 0
            This matches the sequence number of the last text pack (0x2c = 44)
  21 : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 = last sequence numbers for block 1..7 (none)
  28 : 09 = language code for block 0: English
  29 : 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 = language codes for block 1..7 (none)
@end smallexample

@node Sony Text File Format (Input Sheet Version 0.7T)
@chapter Sony Text File Format (Input Sheet Version 0.7T)

This text file format provides comprehensive means to define the text
attributes of session and tracks for a single block. More than one
such file has to be read to form an attribute set with multiple blocks.

The information is given by text lines of the following form:
  purpose specifier [whitespace] = [whitespace] content text
[whitespace] is zero or more ASCII 32 (space) or ASCII 9 (tab) characters.
The purpose specifier tells the meaning of the content text.
Empty content text does not cause a CD-TEXT attribute to be attached.

The following purpose specifiers apply to the session as a whole:

@smallexample
  Specifier           =  Meaning

  Text Code           =  Character code for pack type 0x8f
                         "ASCII", "8859"
  Language Code       =  One of the language names for pack type 0x8f
  Album Title         =  Content of pack type 0x80
  Artist Name         =  Content of pack type 0x81
  Songwriter          =  Content of pack type 0x82
  Composer            =  Content of pack type 0x83
  Arranger            =  Content of pack type 0x84
  Album Message       =  Content of pack type 0x85
  Catalog Number      =  Content of pack type 0x86
  Genre Code          =  One of the genre names for pack type 0x87
  Genre Information   =  Cleartext part of pack type 0x87
  Closed Information  =  Content of pack type 0x8d
  UPC / EAN           =  Content of pack type 0x8e
  Text Data Copy Protection = Copyright value for pack type 0x8f
                              "ON" = 0x03, "OFF" = 0x00
  First Track Number  =  The lowest track number used in the file
  Last Track Number   =  The highest track number used in the file
@end smallexample

The following purpose specifiers apply to particular tracks:
@smallexample
  Track NN Title      =  Content of pack type 0x80
  Track NN Artist     =  Content of pack type 0x81
  Track NN Songwriter =  Content of pack type 0x82
  Track NN Composer   =  Content of pack type 0x83
  Track NN Arranger   =  Content of pack type 0x84
  Track NN Message    =  Content of pack type 0x85
  ISRC NN             =  Content of pack type 0x8e
@end smallexample

The following purpose specifiers have no effect on CD-TEXT:
@smallexample
  Remarks             =  Comments with no influence on CD-TEXT
  Disc Information NN =  Supplementary information for use by record companies.
                         ISO-8859-1 encoded. NN ranges from 01 to 04.
  Input Sheet Version =  "0.7T"
@end smallexample


The following purpose specifiers accept byte values of the form 0xXY.
  Text Code , Language Code , Genre Code , Text Data Copy Protection
E.g. to indicate MS-JIS character code (of which the exact name is unknown):
  Text Code           = 0x80
Genre Code is settable by 0xXY or 0xXYZT or 0xXY 0xZT.
  Genre Code          = 0x001b

Purpose specifiers which have the meaning "Content of pack type 0xXY"
may be replaced by the pack type codes.  E.g.:
  0x80                =  Session content of pack type 0x80
  Track 02 0x80       =  Track content of pack type 0x80 for track 2.
Applicable are pack types 0x80 to 0x86, 0x8d, 0x8e.

Text Code may be specified only once. It gets speficied to "ISO-8850-1"
automatically as soon as content is defined which depends on the text
encoding of the block. I.e with pack types 0x80 to 0x85.

If a track attribute is set, but the corresponding session attribute is not
defined or defined with empty text, then the session attribute gets attached
as empty test. (Normally empty content is ignored.)

Example cdrskin run with three tracks:

@smallexample
  $ cdrskin dev=/dev/sr0 -v input_sheet_v07t=NIGHTCATS.TXT \
            -audio track_source_1 track_source_2 track_source_3
@end smallexample

The contexts of file @file{NIGHTCATS.TXT} used above is:
@smallexample
Input Sheet Version = 0.7T
Text Code           = 8859
Language Code       = English
Album Title         = Joyful Nights
Artist Name         = United Cat Orchestra
Songwriter          = Various Songwriters
Composer            = Various Composers
Arranger            = Tom Cat
Album Message       = For all our fans
Catalog Number      = 1234567890
Genre Code          = Classical
Genre Information   = Feline classic music
Closed Information  = This is not to be shown by CD players
UPC / EAN           = 1234567890123
Text Data Copy Protection = OFF
First Track Number  = 1
Last Track Number   = 3
Track 01 Title      =  Song of Joy
Track 01 Artist     =  Felix and The Purrs
Track 01 Songwriter =  Friedrich Schiller
Track 01 Composer   =  Ludwig van Beethoven
Track 01 Arranger   =  Tom Cat
Track 01 Message    =  Fritz and Louie once were punks
ISRC 01             =  XYBLG1101234
Track 02 Title      =  Humpty Dumpty
Track 02 Artist     =  Catwalk Beauties
Track 02 Songwriter =  Mother Goose
Track 02 Composer   =  unknown
Track 02 Arranger   =  Tom Cat
Track 02 Message    =  Pluck the goose
ISRC 02             =  XYBLG1100005
Track 03 Title      =  Mee Owwww
Track 03 Artist     =  Mia Kitten
Track 03 Songwriter =  Mia Kitten
Track 03 Composer   =  Mia Kitten
Track 03 Arranger   =  Mia Kitten
Track 03 Message    =  
ISRC 03             =  XYBLG1100006
@end smallexample

@node CDRWIN Cue Sheet with CD Text
@chapter CDRWIN Cue Sheet with CD Text

A CDRWIN cue sheet file defines the track data source (@kbd{FILE}),
various text attributes (@kbd{CATALOG}, @kbd{TITLE}, @kbd{PERFORMER},
@kbd{SONGWRITER}, @kbd{ISRC}), track block types (@kbd{TRACK}), track
start addresses (@kbd{INDEX}).  The rules for CDRWIN cue sheet files are
described at @url{http://digitalx.org/cue-sheet/syntax/} [4].

There are three more text attributes mentioned in the cdrecord manual
page for defining the corresponding CD-TEXT attributes: @kbd{ARRANGER},
@kbd{COMPOSER}, @kbd{MESSAGE}.

An Example of a CDRWIN cue sheet file:
@smallexample
CATALOG 1234567890123
FILE "cdtext.bin" BINARY
TITLE "Joyful Nights"
  TRACK 01 AUDIO
    FLAGS DCP
    TITLE "Song of Joy"
    PERFORMER "Felix and The Purrs"
    SONGWRITER "Friedrich Schiller"
    ISRC XYBLG1101234
    INDEX 01 00:00:00
  TRACK 02 AUDIO
    FLAGS DCP
    TITLE "Humpty Dumpty"
    PERFORMER "Catwalk Beauties"
    SONGWRITER "Mother Goose"
    ISRC XYBLG1100005
    INDEX 01 08:20:12
  TRACK 03 AUDIO
    FLAGS DCP
    TITLE "Mee Owwww"
    PERFORMER "Mia Kitten"
    SONGWRITER "Mia Kitten"
    ISRC XYBLG1100006
    INDEX 01 13:20:33
@end smallexample

@node References
@chapter References

@enumerate
@item Correspondence with Leon Merten Lohse 
in @email{libcdio-devel@@gnu.org} circa 2011
@anchor{mmc3r10g.pdf}
@item MMC3 Revision 10 Reference
@url{http://www.t10.org/cgi-bin/ac.pl?t=f&f=mmc3r10g.pdf}
@anchor{cdtext.zip}
@item Documents inside Sony's @file{cdtext.zip}
@url{http://www.sonydadc.com/file/}
@item CDRWIN Cue Sheet information
@url{http://digitalx.org/cue-sheet/syntax}
@item libcdio source code @url{http://www.gnu.org/s/libcdio}
@item cdrecord source code @url{ftp://ftp.berlios.de/pub/cdrecord/alpha}
@item cdrecord manual page. 
@url{http://cdrecord.berlios.de/private/man/cdrecord/cdrecord.1.html}
@item CD Text Language codes
@url{http://tech.ebu.ch/docs/tech/tech3264.pdf}
@item Genre codes
@url{http://helpdesk.audiofile-engineering.com/index.php?pg=kb.page&id=123} 
@end enumerate

@bye
