See also @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/glossary}.

@table @acronym

@item CD
Compact Disc

@item CD-DA
Compact Disc Digital Audio, described in the ``Red Book'' or ICE
908. This commonly referred to as an audio @acronym{CD} and what most
people think of when you play a @acronym{CD} as it was the first to
use the @acronym{CD} medium.

@item CD-i Bridge

A standard allowing CD-ROM XA discs to play on CD-i.  Kodak PhotoCDs
are CD-XA Bridge discs.

@item CD-ROM
Compact Disc Read Only Memory or ``Yellow Book'' describe in Standards
ISO/IEC 10149. The data stored on it can be either in the form of
audio, computer or video files.

@item CD-ROM Mode 1 and Mode2

The Yellow Book specifies two types of tracks, Mode 1 and Mode 2. Mode
1 is used for computer data and text and has an extra error correction
layer. Mode 2 is for audio and video data and has no extra correction
layer. CD-ROM/XA An expansion of the CD-ROM Mode 2 format that allows
both computer and audio/video to be mixed in the same track.

@item CD XA
CD-ROM EXtended Architecture. A modification to the CD-ROM
specification that defines two new types of sectors.  CD-ROM XA was
developed jointly by Sony, Philips, and Microsoft, and announced in
August 1988. Its specifications were published in an extension to the
Yellow Book.  CD-i, Photo CD, Video CD and CD-EXTRA have all
subsequently been based on CD-ROM XA.

CD-XA defines another way of formatting sectors on a CD-ROM, including
headers in the sectors that describe the type (audio, video, data) and
some additional info (markers, resolution in case of a video or audio
sector, file numbers, etc).

The data written on a CD-XA is consistent with and can be in ISO-9660
file system format and therefore be readable by ISO-9660 file system
translators. But also a CD-I player can also read CD-XA discs even if
its own `Green Book' file system only resembles ISO 9660 and isn't
fully compatible. 

@item FSF
Free Software Foundation, @uref{http://www.fsf.org/}

@item GNU
@acronym{GNU} is not @acronym{UNIX}, @uref{http://www.gnu.org/}

@item ISO
International Standards Organization. 

@item ISO 9660

The ISO 9660 format is a logical filesystem format for CD-ROM
media. It was standardized in 1988 and replaced the High Sierra
standard for the logical format on CD-ROM media (ISO 9660 and High
Sierra are identical in content, but the exact format is different).

@item Joliet extensions

This standard was developed for Windows 95 and Windows NT by Microsoft
as an extension of ISO 9600 to support long file names up to 64
characters.

@item Mixed-Mode 

A CD that contains tracks of differing CD-ROM Mode formats. For
example a discs could contain both computer data (Yellow Book) and
audio (Red Book) tracks. 

@item Multisession 

A way of writing to a CD that allows more data to be
added to readable discs at a later time.

@item Session

A fully readable complete recording that contains one or more tracks
of computer data or audio on a CD.

@item SVCD
Super @acronym{VCD} @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/svcd}

@item Track 

A unit of data of a CD. The size of a track can vary; it can occupy
the entire contents of the CD. Most CD standards however require that
tracks have a 150 frame (or ``2 second'' lead in gap.

@item VCD
Video @acronym{CD} @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/vcd}

@item XA
See @acronym{CD-ROM XA}

@end table
